

Concepts Used and Key Historical Events in Social Groupwork Practice  
a. Group or social group is defined as two or more people with a common interest, interacting 
and interdependent with a collective identity and stable structure. 
b. Social group work (SGW) is a method of social work which helps individuals enhance their 
social functioning through purposeful group experiences, and to cope more effectively with 
their personal, group or community problems. 
c. Formed groups and Natural groups. Formed groups are those that meet because of external 
influence, with some support or social relationships and converge for a specific purpose. 
Natural groups are formed thru unplanned gatherings, mutual attraction or perceived needs. 
d. Treatment and Task groups. Treatment groups bond for personal needs and common 
concerns while task groups gather to accomplish a task. 
e. In groups and Out groups. In groups identify themselves with the group, out groups do not 
do so. 
f. Group as medium of change refers to the means by which groups bring about change where 
the focus of change is the individual member. 
g. Group as target of change points to the whole group or certain aspects of the group needing 
change to effect change on its members. 
h. Group as agent of change aims at the active involvement of the group to deal with 
constraints imposed by the external environment which affects the group’s development. 
i. Group use for effect on participants is a result of the worker’s efforts to bring changes in 
values and attitudes of members. 
j. Group use for collective problem solving is a worker’s purpose for group members to pool 
ideas on a task. 
k. Group use for change in social situations is facilitated by groupworkers through pressure, 
information dissemination, etc. on the external environment. 
a. Group 
• Two or more people 
• Shared goals 
• People see themselves as members 
• There is interaction among members 
b. Social 
Groupwork 
• It is a process and method through which group processes is 
influenced by the worker who purposefully guides the 
interaction towards the accomplishment of aims which are 
agreed in selfgoverning context (Wilson and Ryland,1949). 
• As a method of social work which helps individuals to enhance 
their social functioning through purposeful group experiences, 
and to cope more efficiently with personal, group and 
community problems. (Perlman (1957) & Murphy (1959) 
• It is a method through which members in many groups in 
different social agency settings are helped by a worker who 
facilitates their interchange in programs and activities planned 
for them to connect themselves to other people and undergo 
maturation circumstances in line with their needs and 
capacities towards individual, group and community 
development (Trecker, 1965) 
• The treatment procedure in this group work (remedial) 
approach includes intake, diagnosis and treatment planning, 
group composition and formation, group development and 
treatment, evaluation and termination. (Vinter,1974). 

• Elements of the different concepts are the Individual who is 
helped by a groupworker through a process of interaction 
among group members using activities designed for interaction 
to meet their individual and collective needs. The goal of the 
method is enhanced social functioning of the individual through 
group experiences. 
•  
c. Treatment 
Group Vs. 
Task Group 
 
d. Formed 
Groups Vs. 
Natural 
Groups 
 
e. Ingroup Vs 
Outgroup 
Ingroups and outgroups are sociological terms where persons refer to 
themselves as “we” and to outsiders as “they”. Ingroups is based on 
ethnocentrism while outgroups are not. Similarity in behavior, attitude 
and opinion is observed among the members of ingroup. But they show 
dissimilar behavior; attitude and opinion towards the members of 
outgroup. Ingroup members express positive attitude towards their 
fellow members but display negative attitudes towards those outside 
their group. Ingroup members express sense of belonging, co-
operation, good-will, mutual help and possess a sense of solidarity, a 
sense of brotherhood and willingness to sacrifice for the group. But a 
sense of avoidance, dislike, indifference and antagonism towards the 
members of outgroups. Ingroup members feel that their personal 

welfare relates to other members, but outgroup members do not feel 
so. 
f. Group as a 
medium of 
Change 
• Group as medium of change refers to the influence of the 
group on a target member where the social worker guides the 
group processes to achieve the desired change. The 
groupworker facilitating the processes is focused on helping the 
members with their problems. 
• An example of a desire change would be to learn, unlearn, 
relearn social norms, enhance self-esteem, obtain a sense of 
belonging are among those the group can teach him. Those 
who struggle with anger, depression, anxiety or mental health 
issues may learn controlling emotions and behavior through a 
group. 
g. Group as a 
target of 
change 
• Group as target of change points to changing aspects of the 
whole group like group size, structure, procedures so that 
changes on its members can be done. For example. a change in 
communication style may need to shift to fit the needs of the 
group. The worker facilitates this change to increase member 
participation in decision making and interaction. 
h. Group as 
agent of 
change 
• Group as agent of change refers to working with the group to 
effect changes in the environment, which constrains their 
growth and development. The group gets actively involved in 
achieving their own goals, enhancing autonomy and 
confidence. This leads to imbibing a social work value of human 
empowerment. To illustrate, a group of survivors of violence 
may decide on involving the whole community to protest and 
implement programs that protest, educate and advocate to end 
violence. 
• Vinter and Galinsky refers to two kinds of groups in the 
environment as personal social environment (family, school 
among others) and social entities (security personnel in an 
institution, house parents in a rehabilitation center. In dealing 
with personal environments, group attention can be 
concentrated on sharing past experiences, proper behavior 
problem-solving strategies. In working with social entities, 
homogenous groups in the community share common 
experiences. 
• Modifying the environment may related to varied concerns 
such as lack of resources (lack of jobs, discriminative attitudes 
in the community, violation of rules and regulations, excessive 
agency policies, among others). The worker’s role of 
information-giver, facilitator, mediator, adviser will guide the 
group to the changes it seeks. The group may use strategies 
such as bargaining or negotiation, persuasion and other change 
techniques. 
• The environment may have opportunities and constraints. 
Opportunities include availability of resources, facilities, and 
flexible work schedules. Constraints may be the bureaucratic 
processes and legalities. The dynamics among group members 
influences the larger external environment. The more cohesive 
the members are would lead to better cognition of their 

influence. And vice-versa, for an environment to influence the 
group, it should be perceived by the group as supportive to its 
aim for change. Thus, the social worker’s challenge in work with 
groups is the skillful use of groups as medium, target and agent 
of change. 
i. Uses of 
Group 
• Group use for effect on participants. The purposes of 
socialization, resocialization, acquiring, modifying values / 
attitudes, knowledge of self-esteem, needs for support and 
belonging. 
• Group use for collective problem solving. This concept refers to 
working on tasks which need ideas, group thinking about 
emotional, social situations. Workers in residential institutions 
work deal with abused pregnant women who need help in 
deciding whether to keep the baby or give it up for adoption. 
Workers help substance abusers deal with pressure to go back 
and do drugs or stay clean, prostituted women who work to 
earn money or do tricks again and women on a funded income 
generating project who meet to resolve issues affecting the 
organization. 
• Group use for change in social situations. The group worker 
may do the social action role in community organizing such as 
the community people protesting the entry of a mining 
company in their barangay or organizing a group of fishermen 
for seaweed production to increase their income. 
 
SGW history in the 
United States 
• Prior historical accounts posit that groupwork began when 
individuals joined groups for self-help and self-development. 
Early group workers borrowed knowledge from education 
and sociology whose practitioners were involved in the self-
help movements. 
• The recreation movement was the wellspring of character-
building, value of play and social activities. The English 
influence of this movement can be traced to informal play. 
Later, athletics became part of the education in English 
universities. The English influence spread to Germany, 
Sweden and Denmark through the playground movement. 
The movement influenced the introduction of sports in 
college and organization of the Playground and Recreation 
Association of America in 1911. 
• The use of groups as a medium for change began during first 
three decades of this century (probably 1800’s) during the 
development of settlement houses, informal self-help 
recreational organizations, Jewish centers and the scouting 
movement (Zastrow, 1992). These agencies focused on 
providing group programs for people considered “normal”. 
Recipients of early group services came for leisure, informal 
education, friendship and social action. Early recipients 
learned to work together and adjust with others socially; they 
enhanced themselves through new knowledge, skills and 
interests; and the general state of society was improved 

through active participation in community concerns. Social 
group work method obtained its institutional foundation from 
the settlements. Concepts for the development of responsible 
citizenry, mutual aid, and group action originated from the 
English educators. Service workers and volunteers once chose 
to live in specific districts with the working people. The 
service workers strived to educate and assist them to find 
solutions to problems. 
• Settlement House (Prototype of modern-day community 
center) 
I. Toynbee Hall was the first settlement house 
established in London in 1884. The middle-class 
volunteers prioritized “environmental reform” but 
also endeavored to teach the poor, middle-class 
values of work, thrift, and abstinence as to key to 
success. The Toynbee Hall played a critical role in 
preparing and lobbying for social policy and 
legislation. 
II. Settlement-house leaders believed upgrading 
neighborhoods would improve communities and 
would lead to a better society. Social group work 
originated from the English settlements where the 
poor can participate in trainings through lectures, 
discussion groups, and special groups. The purpose 
was to enhance their moral and mental capacities to 
insure full participation in a democracy in the U.S. The 
interaction benefitted both educated volunteers and 
the poor, the latter learning common work and 
studies while former exert cultural influence. Social 
group work activities in the English settlements were 
1) Personality development 2) Teaching of democratic 
value 3) Character-building 4) Enhancement of 
interpersonal skills. 
III. The concept of settlement in London was later 
adopted in the United States and added certain 
necessary and relevant functions. 
IV.  Functions of SGW activities in U.S settlements were 
1) Encouragement and support of cultural and ethnic 
contributions 2) Framing of democratic values 3) 
Assisting active and responsible involvement in 
community life. 4) Organization of neighborhoods for 
social reform 5) Demonstration of ethical and middle-
class morals. 
V. Hull House 1889 
a. Jane Addams co-founded Hull House Chicago with 
Ellen Gates Starr. She was the most noted leader 
in the settlement-house movement. Hull House 
workers provided prompt aid to individuals such 
as food, shelter, and information on and referral 
for other services. Its achievements served as a 
blueprint for settlement houses in other areas of 

Chicago and many large cities in the United 
States. 
b. The residents advocated for social change such as 
equal opportunities for the poor and 
handicapped and elimination of the prejudice and 
discrimination against people because of skin 
color, religion, race and foreign birth. 
c. Settlement houses provided programs like Boys 
and girls club, Kindergarten, Adult education, 
Handicraft, Art and cultural workshops 
 
• Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) George Williams 
founded YMCA as a prayer circle consisted of 12 fellow 
employees of Williams. Organized for the improvement of the 
spiritual and mental conditions of young men. 
• U.S YMCA The first organization to help army soldiers during 
wartime  
a.  First to implement community sports and athletics, 
invented volleyball and basketball and taught water 
safety and swimming  
b. Designed an international program of social service 
similar to the Peace Corps.  
c. The Young Women Christian Association (YWCA) was 
established by Thomas V. Sullivan, a retired mariner. and 
organized in Boston in 1866 Gave affordable shelters for 
young girls and women. 
d.  Group activities of missionary and religious nature began 
on latter part of 1800s 
• 19th century Evolution of SGW in the Philippines 
a. When the Americans colonized the Philippines, they 
brought the democratic way of life and a democratic 
system of government. 1911 - The Americans organized 
the YMCA in the Philippines 1926 - The Americans 
organized the YWCA in the Philippines 1936 - The Boy 
Scouts of the Philippines (BSP) organized 
b. Social group work may have evolved from socio-civic 
movements during the American colonial rule. These 
agencies initiated the formal organization of 
group  serving agencies using recreation as a means of 
character building. BSP and GSP popularized camping as a 
place for citizenship preparation and instilling of positive 
values. 
c. While casework was introduced from the United States 
during the 1920s, the socio-civic organizations initiated 
recreation activities for personality development and 
moral enhancement. These purposes were referred to as 
the socialization function” of institutions catering to 
groups 
d. The establishment of schools of social work in the 
Philippines in the early 50s notably the Philippine School 
of Social Work brought about the practice of fieldwork 

placement of social work students in welfare agencies. 
Most of the pioneer faculty teaching groupwork were 
former staff of these socio-civic agencies. 
• Philippine Youth Welfare Coordinating Council (PYWCC) was 
the first agency to demonstrate social group work services 
can support and augment youth services. 
• Jose Abad Santos Memorial School (JASMS) initiated social 
group work services to augment counseling and guidance 
services. 
• Other schools/institutions who used SGW for counselling & 
guidance services: Institute of Social Work and Community 
Development at the University of the Philippines also placed 
their students in welfare agencies for field practice. Social 
group work was later acknowledged by welfare agencies as 
effective method to supplement casework services in 
expediting recovery of client groups. The schools of social 
work hastened the development of SGW as a method in the 
Philippines. 
• UNICEF-Assisted Social Services Project Provided scholarships 
for graduate studies in social work that specified group work 
and community organization as the area of concentration for 
the scholars of the schools of social work 1965 
• The Philippine YMCA policy required secretaries to acquire 
units in SGW and community organization as requirements of 
a staff position. 1966 
a. YMCA prioritized hiring staff with SGW training. 
b. Other welfare institutions started to use the SGW 
method: Child welfare institutions, Institutions for the 
elderly, rehabilitation centers for the handicapped/PWDs, 
Youth centers and community centers of the Department 
of Social Welfare 
c. Social group work services in public and private caring 
institutions arranged for street children, group experience 
close to a family and neighborhood environment to deter 
the onset of nonconforming behavior 
d. For youth delinquents, SGW is used to deflect deviant 
values and behavior to socially accepted norms and 
enhanced social functioning 
• Foster Parents Plan, Inc. A family welfare agency that 
employed SGW method to promote responsible parenthood, 
livelihood skills training and citizenship training programs for 
group of mothers. 
• Home for the Aged Elderly are helped with group experiences 
for socialization, recreation, vocational and intellectual 
interests. Social group work for parents of the mentally 
retarded enabled acceptance and positive attitude towards 
their handicapped children which added to their well-being. 
• National Vocational Rehabilitation Center for the Disabled 
(DSW) The agency used SGW to develop positive work 
behavior and values among its PWD clients who who were 
former beggars and find begging more profitable. 

• Integrated Human Resource Development Program A DSW 
program employed SGW for destitute out of school youth to 
meet varied problems and needs 
• Other Private Agencies that Pioneered SGW 1) Christian 
Children’s Fund (National Office) The use of SGW as an 
avenue of personality growth and development among 
mothers in 74 CCF Project Affiliates has been the agency’s 
direction as a crucial role in their children’s development. 
Mothers are grouped to organize activities in the day care, 
nutrition, education, spiritual and value 
formation/enhancement programs of their children. 
• 2) Kaunlaran Multi-Purpose Center A 6-month group building 
program to develop skills in five levels among youths aged 13-
17 y/o. 
a. Self-awareness skills where members must be able to 
name and exhibit both personal positive and negative 
feelings through group dynamics, song analysis and bible 
reading. 
b. Interpersonal relations skills among members who are 
assisted to demonstrate positive and negative feelings 
about others, to volunteer to help others and express 
their need for others. These purposes are achieved 
through role playing, reflection sessions, and other group 
activities. 
c. Verbal and non-verbal communication skills for members 
assisted to express his/her ideas, perception, feelings and 
give feedback on topics discussed. The aims of enhancing 
relationships and self-expressions are realized using 
group dynamics, outings, sports, group discussion and 
slide presentation. 
d. Group maintenance 
e. Leadership 
• Rizal Youth Development Foundation (RYDF) Focused on the 
physical, economic and social development of Rizal’s OSY. 
Youth involvement in sports activities engender camaraderie, 
strengthen physical well-being and imbibe value of 
sportsmanship. Skills training and self-employment through 
income-generating programs develop economic acumen. 
• Salvation Army An international organization noted for its 
disaster services. The focus is on the Golden Agers Club which 
aim to: Foster and maintain a sense of usefulness and dignity 
for the elderly and Promote physical, intellectual and spiritual 
well-being of members. 
a. Membership criteria are age, available time and need for 
companionship, recognition of the sense of usefulness 
b. Its recreational and educational programs give members 
renewed interests and zest for life. Details are 
determined by the group and agency’s facilities 
• The Young Women’s Christian Association 

a. Members are in-school and OSY girls women aged 10-25 
y/o and employed female or homemaker 25 years and 
above 
b. Holistic dimensions of its programs 
c. Physical well-being using recreation and camping as 
activities 
d. Economic well-being through vocational guidance; 
training and placement 
e. Social well-being through family life educations 
f. Spiritual and cultural well-being through Christian 
education, world fellowship and housing for women 
g. Group solidarity and group accomplishments are 
emphasized 
• The Girl Scouts of the Philippines has 5 Basic Features 
a. Optimum participation for national development plan 
(economic self-sufficiency) 
b. Linkage with environment 
c. Social amelioration programs 
d. Cultural values 
e. Moral values 
• The Philippine Mental Health Association (PMHA) - Group 
work service is carried out in its organized groups in high 
schools known as PMHA’s Student Mental Health Clubs. 
Members are given edifying experiences that increase 
capacity for effective coping with problems of daily life. These 
group experiences aim to: 
a. develop awareness of mental health needs 
b. deepen sense of values 
c. modify attitudes for personal improvement 
d. develop a clearer consciousness of one’s societal 
responsibilities 
e. provide a perspective of national progress and human 
welfare as a whole 
f. Program media for personality development are 
leadership and human relation training, skills training, 
camping, group discussions on varied subjects, group 
dynamics, seminars and workshops 
g. Social group worker guides the group through purposeful 
use of techniques which result in desired thinking and 
changes of outlook of students on their problems and 
needs 
• 1970s-Developmental Goals 
a. Department of Social Welfare/DSSD pursued 
developmental goals targeting the bottom 30% of the 
country’s poor. Development goals were achieved 
through programs on self-employment assistance (SEA), 
leadership training, responsible parenthood, family life 
education programs and day care services (SPDEFS) 
b. Social workers in juvenile and domestic relations courts 
used group experiences to socialize/resocialize legal 
offenders and wards in orphanages. 

c. Community group work was used by organizers during 
the Martial Law years, where consciousness-raising 
efforts focused on rural and urban poor. These groups 
worked on modifying situations of lack of basic needs 
such as water, electricity, housing, medical facilities, etc. 
d. Social participation was subsumed under developmental 
goals in this discussion. Organizing these small groups 
using SGW will enable citizen involvement, devolution but 
shared decision-making and engaging pursuance of goals, 
as part of a democratic society (Bergh,2004). 
• Current times 
a. Developmental goal of groupwork focuses on 
enhancement of capacities of human and community 
resources. Private and government agencies include 
livelihood trainings as program component where project 
management skills, financial management, marketing 
connections are part of the package for the recipients. 
Day care parents are organized for effective parenting 
sessions, household management, personal development 
and the like. 
b. Socialization goals intend to help the group members 
obtain the norms, values and attitudes of society of which 
they were part of and intend to return to after release 
from the institution. Probation offices, drug rehabilitation 
centers, women, girls and youth centers incorporate 
values formation, handling emotional responses to 
situation as part of their treatment modality. 
c. Treatment goals intends to restore the impaired social 
functioning of individuals in small groups. Therapeutic 
services are available to survivors of abuse, disasters and 
substance abuse. Therapies are also given to patients 
with cancer, kidney problems, physically handicapped and 
other long-term illnesses. However, most agencies 
integrate the developmental, socialization and treatment 
goals in a comprehensive plan of intervention of the 
groupworker, considering the socio-economic problems 
members’ face. 
 