

GROUP STRUCTURE AND 
PROCESS IN SOCIAL 
WORK

GROUP STRUCTURE
▪Structure refers to the arrangement or interrelation of all part 
of a whole.
▪Refers to the pattern develop and maintain themselves over 
time in interpersonal relations.
▪Types of structure:
▪Formal (task group, social action group, working group)
▪Informal (therapy/treatment groups)

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
1.Size–refers to the number of persons in the group.
The right size of the group that is needed to get a task 
accomplished or that is required to achieve defined 
goals is a judgement that a practitioner to make.
2. Communication structure –encompasses who interacts with 
whom about what, and this interaction may take 
verbal/non verbal forms

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
3. Affectional Stucture–refers to the pattern of liking and 
disliking within the process of acting and reacting.
a. Natural attraction 
b. Unconscious needs of members

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
Sociometry–refers to the technique in studying the effective relations 
among group members
a.Pairs –dyads; mutual friendship; courtship pairs; pairs of enemies; 
dependency-dominance; complimentary
b.Triads –mediator and two; rivals and one; coalition and one; three-
person alliance; harmonious three-some
c.Foursomes –two pairs; three and one; four person-alliance
d.Isolates –people who hang on the fringe of the group with little 
acceptance from anyone

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
4. Power Structure –refers to the potentiality for inducing 
forces in others persons toward acting or changing in a given 
direction
a. Reward power
b. Coercive power
c. Legitimate power
d. Referent power
e. Expert power

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
5. Leadership –is the ability to influence other people in some way. 
Leadership is a role.
a. Position theory –leadership is base on the position that grants a 
person the power of influence
b. Trait theory -“the great person theory”, assumes that leaders 
have personal traits or characteristics that make them 
different from other people. (Charisma Vs. Machiavellians)
c. Style theory –leadership is based on the style on how he 
influence

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
5. Leadership
c. Style theory
I. Authoritarian –leaders have absolute power
II. Democratic –leaders seek maximum involvement and 
participation from members in all decisions affecting the group
III. Laiessez-faire  -leaders has minimum input or participation; 
members are left to function or struggle by themselves.

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
5. Leadership
d. Situational theory –situation produces leaders; leadership is a function 
of the situation, rather than the person or  what he or she 
does.
e. Functional leadership theory–leadership means the performance of 
the acts that help the group to accomplish its goals; 
“distributed function approach”
a. Group Task Roles
b. Group Growing and Vitalizing Roles
c. Anti-group Roles

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
6. Role–refers to the social-
recognized pattern behavior of 
expectations on the part of a person 
in a certain position which helps us 
to interpret what person is doing or 
is trying to do.
a. Task specialist
b. social-emotional or group 
maintenance role
I.Executive
II.Policy maker
III.Planner
IV.Expert
V.External group representative
VI.Controller of internal relations
VII.Purveyor of rewards and 
punishments
VIII.Arbitrator and mediator
IX.Exemplar
X.Scapegoat

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
Task Roles:
1.Information and opinion giver
2.Information and opinion seeker
3.Starter
4.Direction Giver
5.Summarizer
6.Coordinator
7.Diagnose
8.Reality Tester
9.Evaluator
Maintenance Roles:
1.Encourager of group 
participation
2.Harmonizer and compromiser
3.Tension Reliever
4.Communication Helper
5.Evaluator of emotional climate
6.Standard Setter
7.Interpersonal problem solver

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
7. Group Norms –rules and standards of behavior emerge in the group.
Some norms are time-specific, some apply to all members while 
others apply only to some, some are strictly observed and some 
are not.
E.g. “ideosyncracycredit” –kind of credit for having lived up to 
the expectations of the group that allows them leeway in relation 
to the norms of the present.

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
7. Group Norms
a. Written rules
b. Explicitly stated norms
c. Non-explicit, informal norms
d. Norms beyond awareness

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
7. Group Norms
How these norms can be changed?
1.Through behavioral contagion
2.Through influence on the group from the external environment
3.Through high status members who earned idiosyncrasy credit
4.By groups diagnosing their norms and modifying them
5.By an outside consultant
6.Through group discussion
7.By those  with high self-esteem and who are willing to take risks

STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES OF THE GROUP
8. Status –refer to one’s rank or standing in the group. It is not based no 
interaction or relationship  with other group but on some characteristics 
possessed.
Role-expected to do
Norms –ought to do
Status –Evaluation of worth 

GROUP PROCESS

GROUP PROCESS
1.Group process as changes in the conditions of the group as 
whole.
2.Group process as a developmental sequence that groups go 
through.
3.Group process as the interaction processes or what goes on 
between and among members.

GROUP PROCESS
1.Conformity –yielding to group pressure 
2 forms of conformity
a. expedient conformer –outwardly agrees but inwardly 
disagrees
b. true conformer –conformity wherein both outwardly and 
inwardly agrees with the group

GROUP PROCESS
2. Competition and Cooperation 
competitive atmosphere results when the members 
perceive their personal goals to be incompatible, 
different, conflicting, or mutually exclusive.
cooperative atmosphere results when there is 
compatibility, similarity or complementarily in the 
personal goals of group members. 

GROUP PROCESS
3. Decision making–group decision-making is considered as 
an integral stage or step in the total problem-solving process.
oGroup decision must be in accord to the group interaction. 
oDecision-making by one or few for following reasons:
1.Decision has to be made quickly and it cannot wait for a meeting
2.The decision has to be made is not that important
3.Precedent has been set with similar action being made previously 
and there was no objection from the group.

GROUP PROCESS
4. Decision Making
Railroading tactics –refers to the decision that that benefits the 
sub-group but will be counter productive for the whole group.
TYPES OF DECISION MAKING
1.Voting 
a. Simple majority
b. High percentage voting
1.Consensus
2.Postponing decisions
3.Delegation of decision-making authority

GROUP PROCESS
5. Group Think 
refers to a problem-solving process in which proposals 
are accepted without careful review of their advantages and 
disadvantages, and in which powerful social pressures are 
exerted on a group member who voices objections to what 
otherwise appeared to be a group consensus.

GROUP PROCESS
5. Conflict
a. at least two parties are involved in interaction
b. perceived or real mutually exclusive goals and/or mutually 
exclusive values exist
c. interaction is characterized by behavior intended to defeat the 
opponent or to gain victory
d. Parties face each other using opposing actions
e. each party attempts to gain power

GROUP PROCESS
5. Conflict
Types of conflict
a.Win-lose conflict style (goal is more important than relationship)
b.Yield-lose style (relationship is more important than goal)
c.Lose-leave style (low concern of both goal and relationship)
d.Compromise style (win some-lose some)
e.Integrative style (high concern for both goals and relationship)

GROUP PROCESS
6. Group cohesiveness 
refers to the degree to which members of a group desire to 
remain in the group (established from motivational forces of the group)
a.contribute to group’s welfare
b.Advance the group’s objective
c.Participate in the group’s objective 

1. Members motive 
base for attraction
2. Incentive 
properties of the 
group
3. Expectancy 
concerning 
outcomes
4. Comparison level
a. Attractiveness of 
group
b. Attractiveness of 
alternative 
memberships
1. Maintenance of 
the membership
2. Power of the 
group over its 
members
3. Participation and 
loyalty
4. Personal 
consequences
Determinants 
of group 
cohesiveness
Consequence
s of Group 
Cohesiveness 
Group 
Cohesiveness

GROUP PROCESS
6. Group cohesiveness 
Properties of groups that influence their attractiveness
1.Attractiveness of members
2.Similarities among members
3.Group goals
4.Type of interdependence among members
5.Group activities
6.Leadership and decision making
7.Structural properties of the group
8.Personal Consequences